---
title: "Discussion of Consciousness"
date: 2023-03-12T00:06:02-08:00
draft: false
---

**Mr. Skeptical Astronaut:** My friend, how do you know if consciousness is an illusion or not? After all, no one has been able to pinpoint where exactly consciousness resides within our brain or even accurately describe what it feels like to be conscious. We take for granted consciousness exists because, well, we’ve all experienced it. However, I would argue, given the brain’s track record of constructing a false reality, that we cannot count on our personal experience as reliable evidence for the existence of consciousness.

The crux of the matter is that the ultimate goal of the brain is not to reflect reality as it is but to present it in a way that makes sense to us. Take vision as an example. When light hits the retina, it is translated into electrical signals and sent to the brain. In order for us to recognize things like objects, colors, depths, distances, and textures, the brain aggregates these low-level signals into high-level representations. However, as manifested by numerous examples of optical illusion, such aggregation comes at a cost. While it prevents us from being overwhelmed by unorganized and messy light signals, it also precludes us from accessing the true reality. For instance, if we hear someone speaking and see a person’s lip moving at the same time, we would assume a causal link between the sound and the visuals and use the visual cues to help infer what is being said. However, there is no guarantee that the causal relation exists. In the McGurk effect, when the alignment between sound and vision is intentionally removed, we are easily tricked into thinking we hear different sounds because we see two different lip movements when in reality they are the same sound. This is just one example of how the brain’s construction of reality could be at odds with true reality.

Just like how the senses of vision and hearing are a narrative that the brain creates to help us better navigate through the physical world, consciousness could simply be another illusion that is fabricated to make our lives easier. Consider this evolutionary theory for the birth of consciousness: 

Initially, the raw inputs that the brain receives are nothing more than electrical signals generated by firing neurons. However, over time the brain learns to recognize certain patterns, perhaps in a process similar to how a deep neural network learns to classify RGB pixels into different classes of objects. Gradually it develops a very complicated, hierarchical symbolic system (with the language being the topmost layer) that maps low-level patterns to abstract concepts, which allows us to label and even verbalize these electrical signals. In doing so, the brain literally invents consciousness. If this is true, then consciousness is nothing but an illusion, a virtual wrapper around the raw electrical inputs. Being conscious would be no different from being able to see or hear.

************************************************Mrs. Skeptical Astronaut:************************************************

So the claim here is that consciousness is an illusion, that much of what we think, feel, and experience, are not in fact reflecting “reality” but rather some abstracted notion of reality.

To the evolutionary biologist, this may actually seem like an obvious fact. There is of course no reason that genetic evolution should drive our perceptions to perceive the world ****************as it is**************** - the only objective for mother nature is survival. Dogs smell things we cannot, and bees are able to see ultraviolet light, yet we all live in the same objective reality. 

I am reminded of a thought experiment and an analogy that may help to elucidate this idea further. The first comes from the observation that if one were to try to program a robot to do something as simple as catching a moving ball, one would have to solve several, if not dozens of kinematic equations - both to predict the movement of the ball but also to align the robot’s movement. Solving these equations is non-trivial, time-consuming, and even with some of the brightest minds in the world working on this, we still do not have robots that can do this in a time-effective and cost-efficient manner. Yet, 7-year-old children do this on a daily basis.

Are we to think that 7-year-olds have somehow developed a mental mathematical maturity that surpasses our most powerful commercial computers? Of course not. The brain does not accomplish this task in the same way that a physicist might. We could debate about how exactly a human ****does**** figure out how to catch a moving object (some combination of muscle memory and instinct perhaps), but the larger fact remains: my brain undergoes a calculation *of sorts*, a process of which I am entirely unaware of, and I am then able to instinctively coordinate my limbs to catch a ball. 

This brings me to the analogy. A useful way of thinking about consciousness, if we are to follow the line of reasoning you present above, is that what we experience is a ****************************user interface.**************************** When we open an app, hundreds, if not thousands of lines of code may be running. But what we see is a streamlined and elegant visual, that leaves us entirely unaware of the “magic” beneath the surface. Of course, we don’t ***************want*************** to see the code - that would defeat the purpose!

So far I have provided some further analogies and support for your conclusion. However, if we are to accept that, at least on a certain level, our brain is “hallucinating reality” (credit to [Anil Seth](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyu7v7nWzfo) for this particular terminology), then we are left with several puzzling questions. The first, and perhaps the one of most import, is then, ******************************************************what is the point of consciousness?****************************************************** If what I have said so far is true, then why is there this **************************************cartesian theater?************************************** Instead of catching balls, we might consider hunting food or foraging. Just because mother nature breeds us to be particularly adept at solving these tasks does not ****************necessarily**************** imply that there must be a ************************witness************************ to these tasks. What are we to make of this sense of perspective, of all of these perceptions as somehow ********************************happening to “me”?******************************** In short - why build a User Interface? Especially when it is hard to locate a “user” in the first place. 

There are other concerns one might have as well. The term “illusion” exists because so far in our evolution we have made a distinction between what we think is “real” and what we think is “illusory”. But if even what we think is “real” is also illusory, then what are we to make of dreams? On the one hand, dreams are traditionally classified as illusory - imaginations. However, at the moment in which they are happening, they do in fact **********feel********** very real, and are perhaps no different from the simple perceptory tricks that our brains play on us in everyday life to represent tables, chairs, cars, and the like. 

An interesting line of inquiry would then also be to quantify, or better understand the ************************************************************************************************level at which the brain is representing reality************************************************************************************************. There is a story told by Donald Hoffman, which refers to the experience of watching the subway train. If one arrives early, they see people show up, and then a train arrives. A naive observer might then conclude that `people → subway`. If one arrives late, one may see the train leave the station, and people show up later. They might then conclude that `subway -> people`. Hoffman claims that neither is true; there is a timetable that dictates both the coming of the people and the coming of the train. The argument goes further and states that since we are a part of the universe, we will never see the “timetable” that is actually dictating our reality. In this view, even in Physics, fundamental laws like `F=ma` are actually abstractions of some deeper “timetable”. 

Even if we are to take Hoffman’s claim seriously though, there are certainly “degrees” to which our brain is able to correctly represent reality. It is shown that schizophrenic patients sometimes see through famous [visual illusions](https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/2009/apr/hollow-mask-illusion-fails-fool-schizophrenia-patients) . The same is also true for people on high doses of psychedelics. So the brain is certainly plastic enough to ***************************************at times overcome what is hallucinating***************************************. What does this mean for the broader scope of reality and perception? 

**Mr. Skeptical Astronaut:** I found the three points you raised about the argument that consciousness is an illusion extremely intriguing. To briefly recap, the main ideas of these three questions are:

1. Since we could perform most of our normal daily actions without being “meta” self-aware, what is the point of consciousness?
2. Illusion is defined as something that is not real, thus by claiming that consciousness is illusory, we assume the existence of a reality. However, does this dichotomy between illusion and reality even hold?
3. The brain’s ability to correctly represent reality differs under different circumstances. How do we know or evaluate how well our grasp of reality is?

I would like to enrich and extend our discussion by sharing my thoughts on them. To start with, I love the fitting analogy of consciousness as a user interface that serves to abstract away all the nitty-gritty details about how the brain actually works. Just like the user interface, consciousness exists because we, the user, do not need to get exposed to the actual mechanics of the brain. However, as you mentioned, this leads us to the question of why build the user interface at all, since the brain is able to perform its vital functions almost completely subconsciously. To this point there are two potential possibilities: 1) consciousness is a side effect of some other evolutionary processes; 2) consciousness serves some evolutionary purpose and allows us to perform certain things that would be otherwise impossible to achieve.

One theory that supports the first point stresses the importance of language in the emergence of consciousness. The theory states that language determines how our thoughts are encoded and necessitates the development of consciousness. As a writer, I resonate with this argument a lot through my personal writing experiences. I often find that my inner voice speaks in a way that is similar to writing, and the writing is often in a third-person narrative, i.e. the meta me. I use writing as a thought process, and I have found that I am unable to think deeply without writing my thoughts down. 

However, given how complicated a system consciousness is and how much effort must have been put into its development, it is hard to believe that it emerges solely as a byproduct of language. Thus it seems more likely that scenario 2 is true, that consciousness expands certain capacities of ours which would otherwise be unattainable. There are counterarguments to this theory as well, however. Among all the things that consciousness enables us to do, many of them are useless and even detrimental to our survival. For instance, consciousness allows us to develop a sense of the self, which creates a dichotomy between the self and the other. It allows access to a second, inner world beyond the external, physical world. This sense of the self could encourage selfishness and prevent us from performing our best in collective actions. It may also reduce individual productivity if one got caught up in an existential crisis or nihilism. In order for the second theory to hold, consciousness must engender certain positive effects that are so favorable to our survival that it outweighs all the downsides. The question then becomes what these capacities are. 

A further implication of adopting an evolutionary perspective of consciousness is that, from a probabilistic point of view, it is almost certain that we are merely in the middle of this evolution process, and the current stage of consciousness is far from complete. It is very likely that in the following millions of years (if we manage to survive climate change and pandemic threats first), consciousness will evolve into higher forms with much greater capacities. An interesting question to ponder, then, is what consciousness will be like then.

Now, some unorganized thoughts regarding the second question, the relativity of reality. We experience reality through the medium of consciousness, but at the same time we are also part of that reality - and we know that we are real because “I think, therefore I am” - in other words, we rely on consciousness not only to experience the world, but also to confirm that this experience and our existence is real. Moreover - meta alert - we also rely on consciousness to experience and understand being conscious. All the discussions we are having right now about whether consciousness is real or illusory are possible only because we are conscious. This means that it is simply impossible for us to break out from the limitation of this interface and to think outside of it, when all of our thoughts essentially grow out of it. An analogy is Plato’s Allegory of the Cave, where prisoners chained inside a cave only understand the outside world through shadows casted on the cave wall.

In Plato’s cave, however, an objective truth exists, which is the Sun. Everything we see is a virtual projection of the truth. Although the projections are fake (imitations), their source is real. However, this assumption has been completely shaken by quantum physics, which suggests that a completely objective truth does not exist. The physical reality coexists with the observer and can be affected by the observer. I am no expert on quantum physics, but it is definitely an interesting question how quantum physics lends fresh insights into phenomenology.

**************************************************Mrs. Skeptical Astronaut:**************************************************

In response to Q(1), it seems to be that there are several different concepts and themes we must tackle, perhaps first individually, and then seen as a whole. These concepts are *self, language, and consciousness* (in this context I will be treating consciousness as synonymous with awareness, although we can delve deeper into more abstract notions later). 

As you mentioned, it seems natural that **********language**********  could be the causal force for consciousness (I have argued for this at length elsewhere and would be interested in further exploring the consequences of this claim). I think in order to understand why this is the case, we need to first understand what language offers. 

There is tremendous value placed in **********perception**********. All living things perceive, bats use echolocation, dogs sniff, owls rely on their ears. What is important for our discussion here, is what happens after the perception. In many cases, it’s possible that it leads directly to an action. Imagine the automatic flusher in a restroom. There is a ***********perception →*********** i.e. the person leaving the toilet area. This leads directly to an action or consequence: the flushing. However, one would be hard-pressed to say that the toilet is, in any real-sense, forming a ***********************symbolic representation*********************** of the person who was just there. What is the value of having symbolic representations? From an evolutionary perspective, it is possible to perceive an act without any symbolism. Bacteria do this; they run from danger and move towards food, without any conscious understanding of what they are doing. Self-driving cars are another example, and indeed almost all computer programs are. There are of course symbols in computer code, but there is a lack of a ***********************************self that perceives those symbols.*********************************** At execution time, those symbols are compiled down to a series of 1s and 0s, and only existed to help the human programmer. 

If an agent ****does**** have symbols though, it can then begin to act in more complex ways. At the highest level, we can consider the entire field of mathematics. Symbols are necessary to abstract, to reason, make statements, and solve problems. And this is the beauty of what language gives us - extreme symbolic representation of real-concepts out in the real world. 

Do dogs have symbols? Perhaps. It might have a symbolic representation of its owner, and perhaps of different types of food. But dogs also lack language (at least the sort of language I am using to express the ideas here). So what makes our language more special? As Noam Chomsky has argued, it is infinite. Our symbols are abstract, they refer to things not in existence right now, things that we perhaps never see (or will never be able to see). It is also hierarchical → humans are a subset of mammals which are a subset of animals which are a subset of organisms which are made up of atoms… etc. 

And this is the key point. Our language is so rich, that it enables so many possibilities, all related to the activation of symbols. Other species of course must have symbolic representations that get activated, but certainly to a lesser extent. Indeed, what is special about our language is that it can become entirely self-referential. It is easy to use ************************words to describe words************************ and **************************************************************sentences to describe sentences.************************************************************** To have a language that lacked these properties would not be language at all. 

And herein lies the connection with the ****self.****  Language gives us this rich tool to develop complex symbols and perform manipulations with them. One such tool is to create a rich **************theory of mind************** of other individuals. I.e create a symbol of the people around me. What does this person want? What other symbols is this person associated with? Man, woman, friend, foe? With this realization, it becomes easy for a theory of mind, and language itself, to then become ***************aware of itself***************, putting oneself into those categories, and creating a rich symbolic representation of oneself. 

I believe that this is enough to explain consciousness and the awareness of oneself. You state above that there perhaps must be more, and that consciousness must expand upon certain abilities to order to have arisen in our evolutionary history. But I believe that most of the capabilities granted to us come from symbolic representation and that awareness of such symbolic representation is simply an unhappy byproduct. 

As language became self-reflexive, we created a symbolic representation of self, and then began to map many concepts from the external world into a relationship with our newfound representation of self.  However, this ********self******** is something that we are not even really profoundly in control of, or understand. It itself is just another symbolic representation that we become aware of, and seems to provide little evolutionary benefit. 

If I ask myself today why I like blueberries, I will output a response. I will say something like “because I grew up eating them”. If I ask myself the next day, perhaps the response will be different. Or at some point I might just say “I just like them!”. This awareness that we have, simply ties everything to a ********self********, but that self is just another symbolic representation. It is a byproduct of other symbolism, and it is useful for understanding and acting in it.

As you say, though, it can lead to thoughts of existentialism, nihilism, and excessive worry (and perhaps we are reaching that point in our evolutionary history).
